Box 1.A: Terms of reference of the Wheatley Review
The Wheatley Review will formulate policy recommendations with a view to:
1 Reforming the current framework for setting and governing LIBOR. This work
should, inter alia, consider:
x whether participation in the setting of LIBOR should be brought into the
regulatory perimeter under the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 as
a regulated activity;
x how LIBOR is constructed, including the feasibility of using of actual trade
data to set the benchmark;
x the appropriate governance structure for LIBOR;
x the potential for alternative rate-setting processes; and
x the financial stability consequences of a move to a new regime and how a
transition could be appropriately managed.
2 Determining the adequacy and scope of sanctions to appropriately tackle LIBOR
abuse. This work should consider:
x the scope of the UK authorities’ civil and criminal sanctioning powers with
respect to financial misconduct, particularly market abuse and abuse
relating to the setting of LIBOR and equivalent rate-setting processes; and
x the FSA’s Approved Persons regime and investigations into market
misconduct.
3 Whether similar considerations apply with respect to other price-setting mechanisms
in financial markets, and provide provisional policy recommendations in this area.
Discussion paper and consultation
1.6 On 10 August, the Wheatley Review published a discussion paper, which can be found on
the Wheatley Review webpage.2
 That paper set out the case for reform of LIBOR (which is
summarised in Annex C) and proposed a range of options for reform of the benchmark. In
addition, the paper considered potential alternatives to LIBOR and examined the implications of
the Review’s thinking on other global benchmarks.
1.7 The discussion paper marked the beginning of the consultation phase of the Wheatley
Review, which ran until 7 September. During this period, interested parties were encouraged to
submit responses to the discussion paper, while the Review team held a large number of
meetings with key stakeholders.
1.8 Despite the necessarily brief consultation period, the Wheatley Review received over 60
written responses from stakeholders and met with over 60 individuals and organisations. The
Review team is extremely grateful to those who participated in the consultation process. Annex
B contains an overview of the responses received during the consultation process.
1.9 The Review’s analysis and findings of the failings in the LIBOR process were largely accepted
by those who engaged in the consultation process. The Review has therefore proceeded to draw
up its final recommendations and conclusions on the basis of the diagnosis published in the
discussion paper.
Key conclusions and recommendations
1.10 Through the process of analysis and consultation, the Wheatley Review has reached three
fundamental conclusions that underpin its recommendations.
1.11 First, the Review has concluded that there is a clear case in favour of comprehensively
reforming LIBOR, rather than replacing the benchmark. LIBOR is used in a vast number of financial
transactions; it is estimated that contracts with an outstanding value of at least $300 trillion
reference the benchmark. A move to replace LIBOR could only be justified by clear evidence that
the benchmark is severely damaged, and that a transition to a new, suitable benchmark or
benchmarks could be quickly managed to ensure limited disruption to financial markets.
1.12 The Wheatley Review has concluded that the issues identified with LIBOR, while serious,
can be rectified through a comprehensive and far-reaching programme of reform; and that a
transition to a new benchmark or benchmarks would pose an unacceptably high risk of
significant financial instability, and risk large-scale litigation between parties holding contracts
that reference LIBOR.
1.13 Furthermore, through the course of the consultation, it has become clear that, despite the
loss of credibility that LIBOR has suffered recently, there has been no noticeable decline in the
use of LIBOR by market participants. Indeed, a clear majority market participants responding to
the Review’s consultation argued for the continuation of a form of LIBOR, rather than its
wholesale replacement. While there are other benchmarks that are used in some cases as
substitutes for LIBOR, there is clearly a large role that LIBOR plays in financial markets for which
there is no immediately obvious alternative.
1.14 It should however be noted that, given the immediate focus of the Review and the difficulties
identified with attempting to replace LIBOR quickly, this Review has not attempted to conduct a
detailed evaluation of alternatives that might, over time, come to be used by market participants.
That work should proceed, as described in Chapter 6, through internationally coordinated action.
1.15 Second, the Review has concluded that transaction data should be explicitly used to support
LIBOR submissions. A number of the Review’s recommendations are intended to establish strict and
detailed processes for verifying submissions against transaction data and limiting the publication of
LIBOR to those currencies and tenors that are supported by sufficient transaction data.
1.16 Third, the Review has concluded that market participants should continue to play a
significant role in the production and oversight of LIBOR. While LIBOR needs to be reformed to
address the weaknesses that have been identified, it would not be appropriate for the
authorities to completely take over the process of producing a benchmark which exists primarily
for the benefit of market participants.
1.17 Many alternative benchmarks do already exist and are in use in a number of markets,
although none with such widespread usage as LIBOR. Market participants can, and do, adopt
the benchmark that is most appropriate for each type of contract. The role of the authorities is
primarily to ensure the integrity of the process by which benchmarks are determined rather than
to direct users to adopt a particular benchmark This said, the market is likely to coalesce around
the most reliable and verifiable benchmark for any given transaction; the reforms recommended
by the Wheatley Review to strengthen LIBOR should inform the work being done by the IOSCO
Board Level Task Force (see Chapter 7).
1.18 Drawing on these three fundamental conclusions, this report presents the Wheatley
Review’s ten-point plan for the comprehensive reform of LIBOR, summarised in Box 1.B below.
1.19 This report contains a number of recommendations for the Government, the BBA and the
banks, and the regulatory authorities both in the UK and internationally.
1.20 The Government has already indicated that the Financial Services Bill will be the legislative
vehicle for taking forward those recommendations which are accepted. The Bill is currently being
considered by the House of Lords.
1.21 Under the leadership of Martin Wheatley, the conduct business unit of the FSA, and in
particular the markets division, will work closely with the BBA and the banks to ensure that the
recommendations addressed to market participants are implemented. Martin Wheatley and the
FSA will also continue to engage proactively with international partners in relation to the global
debate on benchmarks, working closely with the Treasury and the Bank of England.
1.22 In addition, the Wheatley Review hopes to inform other work being done by international
organisations to strengthen globally significant benchmarks. In particular, the Review recognises
the work being done by the IOSCO Board Level Task Force, the European Commission and the
European Parliament to improve benchmarks on an international basis and hopes that the
Review is taken as a significant step towards their respective goals.
2.1 A clear finding of the Review is that the systems, controls and governance arrangements
covering the processes of submitting to and administering LIBOR have proven inadequate
especially given the pressures on LIBOR created by market developments in recent years. Given
the importance of the benchmark to the stable and efficient operation of a wide range of
financial markets, there is a strong case for bringing these activities clearly and explicitly within
the regulatory perimeter.
2.2 The FSA and other international regulators have taken action in respect of attempted
manipulation of LIBOR. However, the Review is of the view that a purpose built regime,
including an Approved Persons regime allowing the regulator to exercise control and oversight
over individuals as well as firms, will significantly increase the ability of the new Financial
Conduct Authority to oversee LIBOR effectively.
2.3 This chapter makes recommendations to the Government and the regulatory authorities to
propose amendments to the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (FSMA), and associated
secondary legislation and rules, to enable these changes in regulation and enforcement to be
implemented.
Regulation
Making submitting to and administering LIBOR regulated activities
2.4 At present neither submitting to LIBOR, nor administering LIBOR, is a regulated activity
under FSMA. As a result, while the FSA is currently taking regulatory action in relation to
attempted manipulation of LIBOR by firms, this action is proceeding on the basis of the
connection between LIBOR submitting and other regulated activities, and there is no directly
applicable specific regulatory regime covering these activities. This affects the FSA’s ability to
supervise and take enforcement action in relation to these activities, even when carried out by a
firm that is regulated in respect of its general business activities. The discussion paper therefore
raised the option of specifying either or both of these activities as regulated under the FSMA
2000 (Regulated Activities) Order 2001 (RAO).
2.5 On the basis of analysis and consultation responses, the Review has concluded that, as the
highest risk of misconduct occurs in the contribution of submissions to LIBOR, there is a strong
case to support making submitting to LIBOR a regulated activity.
2.6 However, the administrator also has an integral role in the production of LIBOR. In
particular, the administrator is likely to be best placed to identify any potential manipulation,
carry out preliminary enquiries into this and advise the regulator of the concerns. Failure to
regulate the administration of LIBOR could therefore create a potentially significant gap in the
regulatory regime. Regulation of the administrator would allow the regulator to ensure that the
administrator maintains proper systems and controls for identifying and investigating suspicious
submissions, and reports these to the FSA. The Wheatley Review has therefore concluded that
LIBOR administration should also be a regulated activity.
2.7 Making the acts of submitting to and administering LIBOR regulated activities will
significantly enhance the FSA’s ability to oversee these processes and take action in relation to
any misconduct. In particular, it will enhance the ability of the FSA to take the following steps:
x write and implement rules in relation to the LIBOR process, which will – among
other things – set out the systems and controls that a firm must have in place for
the production of LIBOR;
x supervise the conduct of the firms and individuals involved in the process, with this
supervision including regular reviews of relevant systems and controls in place, as
well as the performance of the activities; and
x take regulatory action for misconduct. If a firm does not conduct itself in
accordance with either the FSA’s Principles for Businesses or any other regulatory
requirements in its LIBOR activities, the FSA will be able to impose a public censure
or financial penalty, and will in addition be able to impose regulatory requirements
on a firm, for example by varying the firm’s permission.
2.8 This will result in a clear, robust regulatory regime that firms will be required to abide by,
while the existence of sanctions will provide a powerful incentive on firms to ensure they act
properly and in compliance with the relevant regulatory requirements. It will also enable the FSA
to create controlled functions in relation to these activities, as discussed below.
2.9 The majority of responses to the discussion paper have been in favour of making both of
these activities regulated activities. In particular, there was broad consensus that making LIBOR
submissions should be a regulated activity under FSMA, with some respondents commenting
that this regulation should have the scope to cover benchmarks more broadly.
2.10 Where there was opposition to such regulation, it came from responses advocating that
judgement be removed from submitting banks, with submissions instead relying entirely on
transaction data or committed quotes. In relation to the question of whether administering
LIBOR should become a regulated activity, most of the responses addressing this issue were in
favour of regulation.
2.11 While there are some disadvantages to making these activities regulated activities,
including, in particular, increased compliance costs for firms and an increased supervisory
burden on the regulator, the Review considers that these burdens are outweighed by the
benefits of regulating these activities.
2.12 The Wheatley Review therefore recommends that submitting to LIBOR, and the
administration of LIBOR, become regulated activities. While the Government will need to
consider the specific legislative changes needed to implement this recommendation, should it
choose to proceed, initial analysis by the Review indicates that these changes can be
implemented by:
x amending Section 22 of FSMA, which currently sets out the nature of the activity
which can be regulated in a way that does not cover LIBOR related activities;
x amending Schedule 2 to FSMA, which sets out the indicative list of the activities
which may be brought within the scope of FSMA regulation, to include
contributing to, and administering a benchmark; and
x amending the Regulated Activities Order to include, as regulated activities,
contributing to and administering a benchmark, with LIBOR specified as a relevant
benchmark.
The scope of the regulated activities
2.13 The new regulated activities should be defined in such a way as to cover the production of
the submissions, the calculation of the benchmark and its publication. Regulation of these
activities should also cover the systems and controls regarding these functions, including, in
particular, the processes for identifying and querying suspicious submissions and advising the
FSA of any such conduct.
2.14 The Wheatley Review does not recommend that regulation should seek to prescribe the exact
elements of the money markets that LIBOR is intended to measure – in other words, the precise
question that submitters are requested to answer. Instead, this should continue to be market led,
thereby being able to respond to the needs and requirements of the market as these evolve.
2.15 This Review has been narrowly focused on LIBOR, and the recommendations are therefore
only made in respect of LIBOR. However, the Review is aware of other work underway in relation
to benchmarks generally, including the EU Commission’s consultation on benchmarks and the
Board Level Task Force set up by the International Organisation of Security Commissions
(IOSCO). In light of this wider work, it is suggested that legislation should ensure that the
regulatory regime can be extended to other benchmarks in the future, if appropriate.
Controlled functions
2.16 Assuming that LIBOR activities will be regulated, the question arises as to how the
Approved Persons regime under FSMA should be applied to these activities.
2.17 Under the Approved Persons regime, certain activities can be designated as controlled
functions by the FSA. The holder of a controlled function must be approved by the FSA in order
to perform that function, and must also comply, in the performance of that function, with the
FSA’s Principles for Approved Persons.
2.18 Creating controlled functions in relation to both submitting and administering will
therefore allow the FSA to:
x ensure that only individuals who can satisfy the FSA that they are “fit and proper”
to perform the role are allowed to hold these controlled functions; and
x ensure the accountability of key individuals – if they do not comply with the
relevant regulatory requirements, the FSA will have the power to impose a public
censure or financial penalty on the individual, in addition to being able to prohibit
them from being involved in any regulated activity.
2.19 This will help to ensure that these individuals are fully aware of their responsibilities in the
performance of their duties, and will thereby assist in supervising and influencing the behaviours
of others involved in the processes.
2.20 Creating controlled functions for these activities may introduce a modest burden on the
individuals involved, and will also involve some additional cost for the firms, as a result of the
necessity for the relevant individuals to be approved. Nonetheless, in light of the importance of
LIBOR, it is considered that it is appropriate and proportionate for these controlled functions to
be created. In introducing this (or indeed any other) element of a new regulatory regime, the
FSA would, of course, be under a duty to have regard to the statutory principle of
proportionality – the burden imposed by any action it takes must be proportionate to the
benefit that will be realised.
2.21 Accordingly, the Review recommends that controlled functions are created in relation to
both submitting to and administering LIBOR. The next section considers the practicalities of
implementing this recommendation.
Location of the new controlled function
2.22 In relation to submitting, the discussion paper identified three possible options for the
creation of the controlled function. These are:
x senior management;
x the manager responsible for the submission process; or
x the individual submitters.
2.23 The Review considers that the manager of the LIBOR submitting process would be the most
suitable role for locating the controlled function. The individual holding this position will be
closely involved in the submission process, and will therefore be able to exercise close control
over the process by checking and confirming the LIBOR submissions, and by directly supervising
the conduct of other employees involved in the process. The manager will also have more
oversight of the process than the individual submitters.
2.24 A number of submitters to LIBOR are currently located outside the UK. Assuming a controlled
function is created, the requirement for a relevant individual to be approved, and the obligations on
the individual, including their liability for a regulatory sanction in the event of misconduct, would still
apply if the individual were located outside the UK (save that in the case of a European Economic
Area (EEA) firm the FSA may not make a function into a controlled function if the role of assessing
the fitness and propriety of the person performing it is reserved to the domestic regulator).
2.25 In relation to administration, the role of the manager of the administration process should
become a controlled function. Again, this role is closely involved in the relevant process, and the
relevant individual will be able to monitor and supervise the process, as well as the conduct of
any other employees involved in it.
2.26 As the Approved Persons regime currently applies to those who have significant influence
over the conduct of a firm’s affairs in relation to a regulated activity, the amendments to FSMA
and secondary legislation recommended above will be sufficient to enable these new controlled
functions to be created.
Transition to the new regulatory regime
2.27 If the Government accept these recommendations, it is anticipated that the necessary
amendments to primary legislation could come into force in 2013, when the regulatory regime
provided for in the Financial Services Bill comes into force. The precise timing of the introduction
of the new regulatory regime will depend on the practicalities involved in the making of
amendments to the Regulated Activities Order and the FSA developing, including consulting
upon, the rulebook covering the new regulated activities.
2.28 Consideration will also need to be given as to how relevant firms are authorised. In
particular, it is possible that a future benchmark administrator (see the next chapter for detailed
discussion of new institutional arrangements) may not currently be an authorised person. A
possible approach to the transition would be for firms who are already performing these
activities to be deemed to be authorised, pending application within a limited specified time.
This would enable the new regime to apply with minimal disruption.
Enforcement and other sanctions for misconduct
2.29 As set out above, regulation will enhance the FSA’s ability to take enforcement action
against the firms and Approved Persons involved in the process, including by imposing financial
penalties on the firms and individuals for breach of the relevant regulatory requirements. There
are also alternative options for enabling enforcement action to be taken, including under the
civil market abuse regime, the proposed European regime for criminal market abuse sanctions
and the wider criminal regime. This report considers these below.
Market abuse
2.30 As set out in the discussion paper, there is already a well-developed civil market abuse
regime in the UK, which stems largely from the EU Market Abuse Directive 2003. However, the
EU and UK market abuse regimes were designed to capture market abuse in relation to financial
instruments, and were not constructed with activities such as benchmark manipulation in mind.
As a result, and for the reasons set out in Annex B of the discussion paper, the regime is unlikely
to capture LIBOR misconduct directly, and even where it might capture such conduct indirectly,
it places a high burden of proof on the competent authority to show the effect, or likely effect,
on one or more financial instruments of any manipulation of submissions.
2.31 The Review has concluded that submission of false or misleading information in connection
with a benchmark such as LIBOR is a form of wider market manipulation and should therefore
be brought within the scope of market abuse. Benchmarks should be brought within scope in
their own right, due to their importance to market functioning, rather than requiring competent
authorities to establish a consequent effect on a particular financial instrument.
2.32 New EU legislation is currently being developed in this area, as follows:
x a new Market Abuse Regulation (MAR) is currently being developed, harmonising
EU law on market abuse. MAR will apply to all EU countries, and is likely to come
into force two years after it is adopted, replacing the existing Market Abuse
Directive 2003;
x a new Market in Financial Instruments Regulation (MIFIR), which for the first time
brings benchmarks into the scope of regulation and ensure fair and nondiscriminatory
access to them and, in so doing, provides an essential underpinning
to the market abuse regime; and
x a Directive requiring the establishment of criminal offences for the most serious
cases of market abuse (CS-MAD), to which a Justice and Home Affairs “opt-in”
applies for the UK and Ireland. The UK may decide to adopt this Directive by opting
in to it in due course, provided the standards are sufficiently robust and do not
entail a reduction in protections against market abuse. The Government has
indicated that it will consider its position once negotiations on MAR and the
proposed revised Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (MIFID), on which CSMAD
depends, have concluded.
Market Abuse Regulation
2.33 EU proposals to begin to extend the regulatory perimeter and principles of fair access and
transparency to benchmarks in MIFIR and amendments to extend the proposed market abuse
regime under MAR to cover attempts to manipulate benchmarks have now been put forward by
the Commission, as set out in Box 2.B below. The Commission has also made a proposal for
corresponding changes to the draft CS-MAD.
Box 2.B: EU amendments to MAR and MIFIR
The amendments are detailed in the Amended Proposal for a Regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council on Insider Dealing and Market Manipulation (2011/0295).
The Amended Proposal extends the definition of market abuse to include transmitting false
or misleading information, providing false or misleading inputs, or any action which
manipulates the calculation of a benchmark.
This provision applies to transactions, orders to trade or other behaviour relating to
benchmarks, where any transmission of information, input, calculation or behaviour is used
to affect, affects or is likely to affect the calculation of the benchmark. A benchmark is
defined for these purposes as being any commercial index or published figure calculated by
the application of a formula to the value of one or more underlying assets or prices,
including estimated prices, interest rates or other values, or surveys by reference to which the
amount payable under a financial instrument is determined.
2.34 These amendments are helpful, positive steps forward, which start to address the concerns
raised in relation to the manipulation of, or attempts to manipulate, LIBOR. The UK should
welcome these proposals from the Commission, while working with its EU partners to secure the
amendments to the proposal which are necessary to ensure that MAR covers the full range of
false submissions in respect of such benchmarks.
2.35 As MAR will apply to all EU countries and is likely to come into force in the near future
(subject to the Regulation being adopted), and as prompt action is being taken to extend MAR
to cover the attempted manipulation of benchmarks, it is recommended that the UK should not
make unilateral changes to its civil market abuse regime prior to MAR being agreed, but should
instead continue to assist in the finalisation of MAR.
2.36 It is, nevertheless, important that MAR is sufficiently wide to cover the possible
manipulation of relevant benchmarks. While work to date has gone a long way towards
formulating the relevant provisions, careful consideration still needs to be given as to the precise
formulation of MAR, including:
x whether the proposed definition of benchmarks is sufficient to cover all
benchmarks, including, in particular, any benchmarks which may not be based on
the value of underlying assets or prices, or which may not use a formula to
calculate the level of the benchmark; and
x whether it should be a necessary element of market abuse that the calculation of the
benchmark was in fact affected, or whether making a false or misleading submission
is sufficient, even if the calculation of the benchmark was not affected. Thought
should be given as to whether a requirement to consider the effect on the benchmark
will push some scenarios, where false submissions are made, out of scope.
2.37 In relation to this second consideration, determining the impact on the benchmark, or
likely impact, may introduce new difficulties regarding evidential burden for the relevant
Competent Authorities which require careful consideration.
2.38 Furthermore, there is a potential risk that a requirement that the calculation of the
benchmark was affected will inadvertently exclude certain scenarios from the regime. For
example, if a false LIBOR submission were made for purposes other than to affect the
benchmark or relevant financial instruments, and did not in fact affect the calculation of LIBOR
as it fell at the top or bottom of the range of submissions and was therefore discarded from the
calculation of the rate.
2.39 It is also important that the sanctions available under MAR for market abuse by firms and
individuals are sufficiently serious to deter this behaviour. The financial penalty of £85 million
imposed on Barclays (reduced to £59.5 million for agreeing to settle at an early stage) for its
failings in respect of its submissions to LIBOR and EURIBOR represents a serious disincentive in
relation to this type of behaviour, and it is suggested that similar penalties should be available
under MAR. Indeed, the LIBOR and EURIBOR investigations underline the importance of many
objectives underpinning impending EU legislation. The need for a strong sanctioning regime in
the proposed Market Abuse Regulation is clear: it sends a powerful message of deterrence
across the EU that market abuse will not be tolerated.
2.40 The UK should, therefore, continue to oppose any attempts to weaken the sanctioning
regime proposed by the European Commission. In particular, a lowering of the indicative
maximum fines provided for in the Market Abuse Regulation would be hard to justify. Having
indicative penalties of this sort provided for in unilateral EU legislation is highly valuable: it sends
a strong public message that the EU takes market abuse, including the manipulation of
benchmarks, very seriously.
New EU-harmonised criminal offences for market abuse
2.41 Important progress has also been made by the EU in the development of CS-MAD. This
includes an amended Commission proposal which provides that criminal conduct shall include
intentionally transmitting false or misleading information, providing false or misleading inputs,
or any other equivalent activity which intentionally manipulates the calculation of a benchmark.1
2.42 As with MAR, the Review has concluded that the amended Commission proposal is a
helpful response by the EU to address the concerns that have arisen in relation to attempts to
manipulate benchmarks. The same considerations should be given to the scope of the offence of
market manipulation and the definition of a benchmark.
2.43 As detailed above, and in contrast to MAR, CS-MAD will not automatically apply in the UK
– the UK has not at present opted in to CS-MAD, which is necessary for the new Directive to
apply in the UK. Furthermore, if the UK does decide to opt in, it would be able to extend or
strengthen specific provisions (as long as this is consistent with the Directive).
2.44 In light of the greater flexibility available to the UK in this area, the Review therefore
considers it sensible to evaluate the question of whether new criminal sanctions in UK law are
required for LIBOR manipulation without reference to the current CS-MAD proposals. The next
section of the report therefore considers this issue on a standalone basis. However, it should be
noted that the recommendations set out below do not seek to prejudice the ongoing
development CS-MAD or preclude the UK from being able to opt in.
New offences under FSMA
2.45 The FSA currently only has statutory powers of investigation with respect to various
offences under FSMA and insider dealing under the Criminal Justice Act 1993. While attempts to
manipulate LIBOR could potentially constitute a criminal offence under legislation other than
FSMA, the FSA is currently not in a position to investigate and prosecute such conduct.
2.46 As set out in the discussion paper, a possible approach is therefore to amend FSMA to
include, as an offence, the making of a false or misleading statement in order to manipulate
LIBOR, potentially by making changes to Section 397 of FSMA.
2.47 While this approach drew some support from certain quarters, many respondents were
cautious about introducing criminal sanctions for LIBOR submissions. Some concerns were raised
about combining criminal sanctions with the continued application of judgement by banks.
There were also concerns expressed that amending Section 397 could unintentionally criminalise
some unrelated activities, create overlap with existing fraud offences and create legal
uncertainty. At least one respondent argued that if criminal prosecution proved difficult to
pursue in many cases, the existence of specific criminal sanctions could prove counter-productive
as authorities could be criticised for not using available powers.
2.48 The Review is mindful of these comments, and of the Government’s wider policy that there
should not be a proliferation of unnecessary criminal offences.
2.49 However, the Review is also aware that, in light of the high value of the contracts that
reference LIBOR, and the financial benefits that might possibly be obtained from manipulating
LIBOR, some individuals may nonetheless be motivated to deliberately and dishonestly attempt
to manipulate LIBOR, either directly or through collusion with others. Such behaviour would
normally be for direct or indirect advantage – for example, by benefiting trading positions. The
perpetrators of such behaviour are likely to be conscious of the dishonesty of their conduct, and
civil sanctions under either the regulatory code of conduct or the civil market abuse regime may
not therefore be sufficient to prevent such behaviour in all cases.
2.50 Further, while this conduct may fall within the scope of other criminal offences, it is
important that the FSA, as the body responsible for the supervision of the financial services
sector, is able to conduct effective criminal investigations and prosecutions in this area. The FSA
is responsible for monitoring and investigating behaviour in the financial markets in relation to
the regulatory and market abuse regimes. The Review considers that it is sensible that the FSA is
also able to use its statutory powers of investigation and bring prosecutions in relation to such
conduct where appropriate.
2.51 The Wheatley Review has concluded that this can best be achieved by amending Section
397, rather than empowering the FSA to investigate and prosecute fraud offences more
generally. This will ensure that the FSA’s ability to investigate and prosecute offences is clearly
limited to offences connected with the financial markets, and will avoid an uncertain and
potentially wide ranging extension of the FSA’s criminal investigation powers.
2.52 The Review also considers that any attempts to manipulate LIBOR constitute sufficiently
serious conduct to merit this being a criminal offence. As set out above, this conduct is likely to
occur in full awareness of the potentially serious and wide ranging impact that manipulation of
LIBOR may have in light of its global use. For these reasons, it is considered that there are strong
public interest grounds for ensuring that this conduct can be prosecuted.
2.53 Accordingly, while it is recognised that there are arguments both for and against amending
the current criminal regime, the Review recommends that Section 397 of FSMA is amended to
cover manipulation of LIBOR, so that the FSA is able to investigate and prosecute such conduct.
2.54 It is envisaged that this could be achieved by amending Section 397 so that it applies to
individuals who intentionally or recklessly make a false or misleading statement in relation to the
setting of a benchmark. The scope of the offence could be limited to false or misleading
statements in relation to the setting of a specified benchmark, or relevant financial instruments or
relevant agreements as currently defined in FSMA. This would retain the necessary connection to
the financial markets. Consideration should be given as to whether it should be necessary to show
that the person acted in order to obtain a profit or benefit, or avoid a loss, and to whether the
offence should also cover undertaking an equivalent course of action (for example, undertaking
transactions at an artificial level in order to manipulate a submission based on these transactions).
2.55 It would also be appropriate at this time to review the workability of Section 397 as a
whole, so that the scope of the market manipulation provision for benchmarks is consistent with
the scope of market manipulation of financial instruments.
2.56 By creating this offence, the actions of others who attempt to persuade submitters to
submit false figures, or who attempt to manipulate benchmarks through collusion, should be
caught as encouraging or assisting others to commit this offence, or conspiring with others to
commit the offence.
3.1 In its discussion paper, the Wheatley Review identified a number of failings with the current
administration of LIBOR, focusing on three key areas of weakness:
x insufficient independence of the governance structures, which relied too heavily on
the participating banks and their own industry organisation;
x inadequate oversight structures, such as the lack of systematic oversight of systems
and controls within contributing banks; and
x limited transparency and accountability of the governance structures.
3.2 Further analysis of the issues and failings with the administration and governance of LIBOR
can be found in Annex C. During the consultation process, the vast majority of respondents
agreed with this analysis. In particular, many noted that that the BBA acts as the lobby
organisation for the same submitting banks that they nominally oversee, creating a conflict of
interest that precludes strong and credible governance. Many questioned whether the BBA
could remain involved in the governance and administration of LIBOR.
3.3 Respondents also raised concerns that the institutions of LIBOR are not empowered to
effectively administer and govern the benchmark. The failure of these institutions to identify,
investigate and sanction participants for alleged misconduct was seen as evidence of this failing.
3.4 As set out in the previous chapter, the Wheatley Review recommends that submission to,
and administration of, LIBOR are regulated by the FSA. However, it is clear that, on its own,
regulation is not a sufficient solution to all of the problems identified with LIBOR. LIBOR must
also, in the first instance, be administered in a robust fashion, with regulation acting as a backstop,
providing statutory powers for intervention and enforcement.
A new set of institutions for LIBOR
3.5 Informed by the considerations immediately above, the Review has concluded that weak
institutions helped to create the opportunity for misconduct, which in turn discredited LIBOR. A
new set of institutions would have the capacity to administer and govern LIBOR in such a
manner that credibility could be restored in the benchmark. Therefore the Review recommends
that the BBA passes on the role of future administration and governance of LIBOR, subject to
the identification of a new institution (or institutions) to take on these roles.
3.6 The Wheatley Review has concluded that LIBOR should be a market-led benchmark,
administered by a private organisation rather than by a public body. The functioning of LIBOR
affects a much wider group of actors than those involved directly in the production of the
benchmark. However, while there is significant justification for regulation and reform of the
benchmark, it is not clear that there is sufficient justification for a public authority to administer
the benchmark.
3.7 As an important market benchmark, it is appropriate that LIBOR can evolve to meet the
needs of users. A private organisation is likely to have a greater incentive to ensure that the
benchmark is fit for purpose and evolves to meet the changing needs and nature of the market.
In contrast, public ownership would: change the relationship between the market that created
and developed LIBOR, and the future evolution of the benchmark; reduce the incentive and
ability for LIBOR to adapt to the needs of market participants; and potentially affect the choice
of benchmarks by these participants.
3.8 Further, the Wheatley Review has concluded that LIBOR can and should be successfully
administered by private organisations, within rules and guidance set by the authorities. The
package of recommendations put forward by the Review is a proportionate response to the
issues and failings identified, and should be sufficient to deliver a benchmark that is robust and
accountable, without moving the ownership of LIBOR to a public authority.
3.9 Introducing a public body to administer LIBOR could also set a precedent for other globally
significant benchmarks. LIBOR is one of many important benchmarks that are used across
financial, commodity and other markets. A policy of transferring such benchmarks to public
bodies, rather than guiding reform through oversight and regulation, could set a precedent that
would need to be applied to many of these other benchmarks.
3.10 The process to identify other candidates to take on these functions should be as
streamlined as possible to ensure that there is limited disruption arising from the transition
between administrators.
3.11 Therefore, the Wheatley Review recommends that the BBA should, under guidance from
the authorities, immediately commence a process for tendering out the role of LIBOR
administration and governance to an independent party. This should take account of the failings
with the existing model and propose a reformed mode of administration and governance.
3.12 Specifically, new institutions should demonstrate:
x greater independence, with a clear distinction between the interests of institutions
and submitting banks;
x specific oversight processes to be set up at administration, governance and bank levels;
x transparent systems, processes and structures, with clear accountabilities at every
level; and
x a firm commitment to providing access to the benchmark on fair and nondiscriminatory
terms.
These expectations of a new institutional model are expanded upon below.
Process for tendering LIBOR institutions
3.13 In order to ensure that an open and transparent process is followed, and that the
recommendations of this Review are implemented in such a way that credibility is fully restored
to LIBOR, the Review recommends that the BBA delegates the tendering process to an
independent committee, convened by the Government and the FSA. The membership of the
committee should be appointed by the authorities, and include an independent chairperson and
representatives from the authorities, the BBA and a variety of other market participants.
3.14 Once established, this committee will conduct a tendering process, based on a set of
explicit criteria. These criteria will be designed to ensure that the new rate administrator puts in
place a reformed governance structure that is sufficiently strong and credible (as discussed in
more detail below). Further, it will take into account other factors such as legal and intellectual
property considerations. The committee will then make a recommendation to the BBA as to the
preferred candidate to take ownership of LIBOR. The BBA will be expected to transfer ownership
and responsibility to the preferred candidate. If LIBOR administration becomes a regulated
activity, the successful candidate will also need to apply for a permission to carry out this
activity, in due course.
3.15 The Review understands that the balance of incentives may not be sufficient to encourage
a new administrator to take ownership of the benchmark in absence of a financial incentive. As
a result, the new administrator should be permitted to explore the commercial viability of LIBOR,
and this will be reflected in the design of the tender process. However, the clear priority in
conducting the tender process will be to find a new administrator to provide a robust
operational and oversight framework for LIBOR.
3.16 Details of the selection committee and criteria will be provided on the Wheatley Review
webpage as soon as possible.
Proposals for a reformed governance framework
3.17 The Review presented recommendations for the regulatory oversight of LIBOR in the
preceding chapter. As such, the FSA will provide a strong degree of external governance to the
entire framework, through supervision and oversight of contributing firms and the benchmark
administrator.
3.18 Given that the Review has recommended that the BBA entrust the role of LIBOR
administrator and sponsor to a new administrator, the Review considers that the detailed design
of the overall internal governance framework should be established by the new rate
administrator. Organisations interested in taking on this role will likely have differing views on
the most effective and robust organisational frameworks, and the tender process will allow
these to be evaluated carefully.
3.19 The Review is open to some aspects of benchmark administration being undertaken by
different bodies, provided this is operationally effective. For example, the separation from
administration of the activities of LIBOR distribution or calculation to another body through a
process of delegation. However, the benchmark administrator should retain overall responsibility
for all these activities.
3.20 While the new benchmark administrator would have the flexibility to design and manage
the organisational and commercial aspects of the framework, there are a number of high-level
elements that the Review would expect to see reflected in the future governance structure.
Indeed, the Review expects that these aspects should take prominence in the tender process for
a new benchmark administrator.
3.21 In particular the Review expects the governance framework should have certain structures
and features. First, the benchmark administrator should be under a requirement to analyse and
scrutinise submissions from contributing banks. Second, the framework should include a
prominent decision-making and oversight role conducted by an independent and powerful
committee with the ability to operate autonomously.
3.22 Finally, the benchmark administrator and oversight committee should take responsibility for
developing and implementing an industry-led code of conduct outlining the detailed policies
and procedures that contributing firms and the LIBOR administrator would be expected to
follow (as detailed below).
Structures for a reformed governance framework
Role of an administrator/distributor
3.23 The benchmark administrator will be ultimately responsible for the effective oversight and
operation of all aspects of LIBOR. There is a specific set of requirements that the Review believes
the administrator should meet in order to ensure that confidence in the integrity of LIBOR as a
benchmark is widely restored.
3.24 The benchmark administrator should have responsibility for many of the operational aspects of
LIBOR, which include the day-to-day management and administration, as well as public relations.
3.25 The Commission’s proposals in Article 30 of the Markets In Financial Instruments
Regulation (MIFIR) require benchmark providers to provide fair, reasonable, and nondiscriminatory
licenses to trading venues and central clearing counterparties to trade and clear
products related to their benchmarks. The administrator and distributor, whether a single body
or not, would need to ensure that access to LIBOR is not reserved for certain market participants.
3.26 Scrutiny of submissions is also a crucial aspect of the benchmark administrator function to
ensure the integrity and credibility of the benchmark. Therefore, as part of the wider benchmark
compilation responsibilities, the administrator should have in place rigorous and effective
systems and procedures for such scrutiny. This should include both pre-publication verification
checks, to avoid manifest errors in submissions, as well as post-publication scrutiny against a set
of verifiable statistics, encompassing inter-bank and other unsecured deposit transactions, as
well as other relevant financial data.
3.27 In addition, there are a number of operational issues that a rate administrator would need
to consider, including:
x defining procedures and criteria for banks to become members of LIBOR panels and
setting out the responsibilities of notice period for banks considering leaving the
LIBOR panels; and
x technical and operational procedures for submitting rates to LIBOR; e.g. to whom
submissions should be made, submission time window, and other operational issues.
3.28 When administering the benchmark, there are a number of issues that may be best
achieved through multilateral agreement. For example, there are decisions relating to the
definition and calculation of the benchmark, which should be achieved through in-depth
consultation with market participants. In order to achieve all of these objectives, the
administrator should convene an oversight committee.
3.29 The administrator should refer any anomalous submissions to the oversight committee as
part of a process of discussion and triage ahead of any referral to the FSA.
Role of an oversight committee
3.30 While, as the regulated entity, the benchmark administrator will have ultimate
responsibility for all aspects of governance, many of the decision-making and technical
discussions should be devolved to an independent and separate external oversight committee.
3.31 The oversight committee should take responsibility for those aspects of LIBOR internal
governance which require the input from a wider pool of stakeholders. The role of an oversight
committee establishes a level of independence and collective decision-making which in turn
should improve the credibility and transparency of the governance process.
3.32 Importantly, the definition, scope and context of LIBOR as a benchmark should remain the
discretion of the oversight committee as this aspect should be informed by market participants.
This would allow participants to ensure that the definition of LIBOR evolves in line with changes
in the structure and operation of financial markets.
3.33 Other responsibilities of the oversight committee should include collective scrutiny of
individual submissions by contributors. As discussed, the rate administrator will have
responsibility for identifying and analysing the submissions against a set of parameters. Those
parameters may need to be defined by the oversight committee, using their expertise and
understanding of the inter-bank funding market.
3.34 The oversight committee should have responsibility for the key instrument of the
governance framework, a code of conduct. The code of conduct should outline the
responsibilities of the relevant institutions of governance, including contributing banks, the
oversight committee and the benchmark administrator (see Chapter 4 for a detailed discussion).
3.35 The oversight committee should be able to enforce low-level sanctions with respect to
participating banks, for example as a result of recurring operational problems. All other breaches
should be referred to the FSA for supervisory review.
3.36 In order to improve representation and independence, the oversight committee should
include members from beyond the ranks of the contributing panel banks, particularly from the
wider cross-section of participants that use LIBOR, or industry bodies who represent those users.
All members should have equal standing on this committee.
3.37 The discussion paper outlined a number of actions that could be taken to improve the
transparency of such an oversight committee, and these should be implemented:
x the terms of reference of the committee should be made available to the public;
x the details of the membership of the committees should be published, along with
any declarations of conflicts of interest and processes for election or nomination of
members of the committee; and
x minutes of meetings should also be published, with a delay where necessary.
3.38 One proposal raised by consultation respondents was that the regulatory authorities should
join the oversight committee. However, the Review has concluded that if, in line with its
recommendations, rate administration and submission are regulated, it would be inappropriate
for the regulator to sit on such an oversight committee, as there would need to be a clear
distinction between external regulatory oversight and internal governance. For this reason, the
Review does not recommend the participation of the regulators.
4.1 In prior chapters, the Wheatley Review has concluded that LIBOR, as an industry-defined
benchmark, should continue to be administered by a private organisation rather than a public
authority. Furthermore, the Review has recommended the introduction of regulatory oversight
of the submission and administration of LIBOR, which would allow the FSA to apply its Principles
for Businesses to LIBOR administration and to write rules specifically relating to LIBOR
submission and administration.
4.2 However, in addition to these rules, the Wheatley Review will also recommend in this
chapter that the LIBOR administrator and oversight committee (discussed in the preceding
chapter) should develop and implement an industry-led code of conduct to provide detailed
guidance on operational and procedural issues of submitting to LIBOR. In due course, the FSA
should consider endorsing this code as industry guidance, providing contributors with clear
guidance on how to act in accordance with applicable FSA rules on the new regulated activity.
4.3 Recognising the transition times required for introducing this new regime, the Review
therefore recommends that, in advance of the code of conduct being agreed, contributors
should be guided by submission guidelines that set out a detailed and accountable process for
the determination of submissions.
4.4 This chapter sets out the key elements that the Review expects to be included in a code of
conduct and defines the submission guidelines that contributors should begin to implement
immediately.
LIBOR submission guidelines
4.5 One of the key findings of the Wheatley Review is that LIBOR submissions should be
explicitly and transparently supported by transaction data. While the Review supports retaining
the existing definition of LIBOR based on unsecured inter-bank lending, there are other relevant
transactions that can be used to support contributors’ assessment of the market for inter-bank
funding, especially during periods of limited activity.
4.6 A detailed, industry-led code of conduct drawn up by the rate administrator and oversight
committee, as discussed below, would serve to ensure that best practice is applied to
operational aspects of LIBOR submissions, in a manner consistent with FSA rules.
4.7 However, it will be some time before the new rule-book and a fully-developed code of
conduct are in place. Given that there is a need to introduce immediate reform to the process of
LIBOR submission, the Wheatley Review recommends that, in advance of the agreement of a
more detailed code of conduct, LIBOR submitters should refer to the suggested submission
guidelines set out in Box 4.B in the determination of their LIBOR submissions.
4.8 These submission guidelines set out the specific transactions that contributing firms should
use to determine their assessment of the inter-bank funding market and the hierarchy of these
transactions.
4.9 These submission guidelines are closely modelled on the undertakings proposed by the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) in their settlement with Barclays Bank Plc.1
 It is
the view of the Wheatley Review that banks should begin to create their LIBOR submissions by
taking account of these guidelines immediately.
4.10 The proposed submission guidelines place greatest weight on the inter-bank deposit
transactions of contributing banks, in accordance with the current definition of LIBOR. For some
currencies and maturities there are sufficient underlying transactions with which to determine
submissions; in this case the weighted average rate of those transactions should be used.
4.11 However, where a contributor bank has few transactions in inter-bank deposits, or those
transactions are not representative of the inter-bank market, then an assessment of the interbank
funding market should be based on transactions or observations of other sources of
unsecured deposits and other relevant financial instruments, as set out in the guidelines.
4.12 Chart 4.A demonstrates that, for a reasonable number of currencies and maturities, there
may be sufficient transactions in the inter-bank and other wholesale deposit markets to be
explicitly used when determining submissions to LIBOR.
4.13 The Review recognises that there are limited transactions on which to base LIBOR
submissions for some currencies and maturities. In Chapter 5 the Review recommends that the
number of currencies and maturities for which LIBOR is published be reduced, with those
currencies and maturities that are thinly traded and used to be phased out over a 12-month
transition period.
Code of conduct for contributing banks
4.14 The Wheatley Review recommends that FSA Principles and rules should provide the highlevel
basis for the regulation of contributing banks and the administrator. It may be necessary
for the FSA to draft specific rules relating to these regulated activities. However, the Review
believes that once a new rate administrator is in place, more detailed guidance relating to
submissions to LIBOR should be developed and implemented.
4.15 Therefore the Review recommends that the LIBOR administrator, through the oversight
committee, should draft a code of conduct, in collaboration with contributors and market
participants, which should serve as a manual for the internal governance and organisation of
LIBOR submission, detailing the specific requirements for firm behaviour and procedures.
4.16 To the extent that these details are not covered by FSA rules, the code of conduct will serve
as guidance on the FSA Principles and rules in relation to the regulated activity of LIBOR