The committee acknowledges the catastrophic effect that the collapse of Storm Financial has had on many investors, particularly those double-geared clients who were not afforded an opportunity to respond to margin calls; fell into negative equity; and were sold out of their portfolios in late 2008, at or near the bottom of the market. These investors now face great challenges in meeting living expenses, repaying debts and, in some cases, keeping their homes.
Some media reporting and some submissions to the inquiry have suggested that Storm investors were generally caught up by the promise of high returns and were motivated by greed to enter into risky investment arrangements.
However, the committee has received evidence from many clients that their key aim in investing through Storm was simply to generate an independent income during retirement. Indeed, it was one of Storm's marketing strategies to appeal to this aim: Our aims were not to be rich but to be mostly independent in our older years and enjoy the company of our family.
The plan was that we would do all this investment and be independent, never have to claim a pension off the government and be able to look after ourselves.
Like the majority of victims caught in this financial disaster, we were made vulnerable by our desire to be independent in our retirement.
Sadly, at our initial consultation in 1997, we had set a time line for our investment portfolio of seven to 10 years.
However, once in the Cassimatis system it was very hard to get out again.
The committee has received in excess of 200 submissions (some on a confidential basis) from Storm investors.
They are a variable group: some were nearing retirement; some are already retired and relatively elderly; some have young families to support well into the future.
Many came from the same community or workplace, and many were referred to Storm by friends or family: Storm asked people considering them to talk to others who were current
clients.
People like to share prosperity and they talked positively, even in glowing terms, about how they felt when they were securing their future.
Now, after the fact, there are whole families who are caught up together.
They have very few financial reserves that are not caught up in this to use to keep roofs over their heads.
People feel morally devastated to have brought their beloved family and friends into such a terrible situation.
This cross of financial loss is a big enough one to bear without additional concerns about having recommended it to others.
Others were longstanding clients of financial advisers who joined Storm or whose previous firms were bought by Storm, particularly during recent years in the period when Storm was looking to launch an initial public offering (which ultimately did not go ahead).
In these cases, clients migrated to Storm with their adviser, rather than actively seeking Storm out.
For many investors, the consequences of their involvement with Storm have been financially and emotionally devastating.
Their losses have typically been magnified by the degree of leverage in which they were encouraged to engage.
Some are now faced with trying to return to work at a time in their lives when it will not be easy for them to find work, or when doing so will be inconsistent with their current state of health.
The committee sincerely thanks those submitters and witnesses who have contributed to its deliberations and knowledge in relation to the collapse of Storm Financial.
The causes of the collapse of Storm Financial are complex and contested.
The committee's sources disagree in many details, including the true nature of the relationship between Storm and the banks (particularly but not solely the Commonwealth Bank); the processes for filling out loan documentation; the obligation (if any) of the banks to contact customers directly regarding margin calls; key meetings and events between September 2008 and January 2009; and the sophistication and understanding of risk by clients who entered into double-geared investment strategies under Storm's advice.
Mr David McCulloch, long-time group accountant for Storm Financial, summarised the business model as follows: using debt, mortgaging the home, using margin lending and using only share market investments.
All Storm advisers operated under direction from Storm's headquarters in Townsville.
As Mr Gus Dalle Cort, director of Storm Financial (Nine) in Cairns, explained to the committee: Everything was directed back to the one system at Storm, from the way we developed our statements of advice to the process of quoting to banks.
Everything was sent back to Storm central and farmed out from there.
Our planning was done back-office, but our input from talking to a client and certainly a lot of our file notes were all sent to the one point.
No advisers were permitted to undertake their own financial planning modelling.
Rather, their role was to explain the Storm financial planning model to clients who were interested and to ensure that clients who were not comfortable with this did not become a client.
All modelling of plans were undertaken by Storm's compliance or cash flow modelling cell, headed up by Julie Cassimatis.
Clients were charged an up-front fee of around seven per cent for the advice they were given by Storm. Before they became clients, they were required to participate in a number of 'education' sessions. The committee was told by Mr Gus
Dalle Cort that it took on average 180 days to be accepted as a client: We had a dozen staff in Cairns, including me.
We met existing clients and new clients, and we had a process. We tracked everything at Storm, and the process for a client to do business with Storm Financial took, on average, 180 days.
That process entitled the client to a number of sessions… This involved finding out not only their personal position but also their financial position and right through to having a number of banks quote on the business, whether it was margin lending or equity lending.
Storm tendered out the client's requirements to a number of banks with which it did business and claims to have made a selection on the basis of service and conditions offered.
Home lending was organised through a range of banks; margin loans were largely (although not exclusively) through either Colonial Geared Investments, which is wholly owned by the CBA, or through Macquarie Investment Lending.
From time to time, clients were encouraged to 'take the next step' and further increase the size of their portfolio, by applying for additional margin loans or increasing their existing margin loans. On occasions, additional borrowing was carried out on the basis of increased value in an underlying property.
In the wake of Storm's collapse, use of the CBA's VAS system to revalue Storm client's houses has been a particularly contentious matter.
As the world's financial markets collapsed across 2008, the value of Storm clients' investment portfolios decreased. It is this decline in value and investor equity, compared with the static value of the loans held, that took the clients' accounts into margin call territory.
In evidence to the committee, Mr McCulloch reflected that: In retrospect, the telling period for Storm clients appears to be around early October 2008…What appeared to be the strength in the Storm modelling now became its Achilles heel, that is, the margin call at 90 per cent.
Under normal margin lending arrangements, as existed with most or all other planners around the country, that is, 75 per cent to 80 per cent margin call ratios, at this time clients would have been margin called and at the very worst would have had about 20 per cent equity left in their portfolios—enough in most cases to clear home loan debts—but of course leaving Storm alone to account for lost values and client dissatisfaction.
A meeting occured between Mr Emmanuel Cassimatis and senior Commonwealth Bank staff in early December, at which Mr Cassimatis attempted to make an arrangement to consolidate client debts into a large corporate debt facility.
A December attempt was made by ASIC to get Storm to agree to an Enforceable Undertaking (EU). Although all parties now agree that this EU was never signed, at critical periods during December and January clients were refused advice when they tried to find out the current status of their portfolios and were led to understand this to be due to an ASIC gag order.
As best we understand it, the intention was that money would be borrowed by Storm from the Commonwealth Bank to meet the margin calls of its clients.
In discussing the proposed EU, Mr Dalle Cort clarified for the committee that the instruction not to talk with clients in the closing days of 2008 came not from ASIC but from Storm's directors:by the directors Julie and Emmanuel Cassimatis. We were instructed by them not to talk to our clients.
Furthermore, Mr Dalle Cort acknowledged that the EU that ASIC presented to Storm was not agreed to: 'It was never signed'.
Of note, Mr Emmanuel Cassimatis, founder and former CEO of Storm, believes the collapse of the company was due to the actions of the CBA.
Despite the large amount of conjecture around the issue, the reason Storm collapsed, when you boil it down, was that the Commonwealth Bank—the major supplier of credit to Storm and its customers—withdrew the credit suddenly, without notice and, most importantly, without justification or indeed without the power to do so under the margin lending contracts.
Despite the fact that the CBA caused a great deal of damage, it exercised its power simply because it could and chose to wreck rather than support Storm and our mutual clients as it had done in the past. The decision by Mr Norris and his colleagues at the Commonwealth Bank of Australia to withdraw credit was made with full knowledge of the devastating consequences such an action would cause. Without this action, the margin lender customers would undoubtedly have suffered some losses, but they would have retained at least some of their assets and would not be in the devastated financial condition that most are in today.
A $2 million dividend paid to founders Emmanuel and Julie Cassimatis in December 2008 was successfully frozen in February 2009, following
ASIC-initiated court action. This freeze was later extended by further court action by Storm's liquidators.
Attempted court action by Storm against the CBA was interrupted when Storm went into administration on 9 January 2009.1